# GOOS BioEco portal documentation

This is the documentation for the GOOS BioEco
[portal](https://bioeco.goosocean.org/) and
[GeoNode](https://geonode.goosocean.org/). More general GeoNode
documentation is available at <https://docs.geonode.org/en/master/>.

The source for this documentation is hosted at
<https://github.com/iobis/bioeco-docs>.

<img src="images/homepage.png" width="100%" />

## How to:

### 1. Register your GeoNode account

Register as a new user or data provider at the top right hand corner of
the GeoNode GOOS BioEco homepage. You will be prompted to complete basic
details such as an email address, username and password.

<img src="images/register.png" width="100%" />

#### User account and profile

After the details have been completed, you will be signed in and
redirected to the homepage with your username indicated on the top right
hand corner. An arrow next to the username provides a drop down menu
with basic user and account options. From the <span
style="color:gray;">**Profile**</span> page, personal information and
options can be added and changed. Interaction with other users is
possible by <span style="color:gray;">**Message User**</span> or <span
style="color:gray;">**Invite Users**</span>

<img src="images/dropdown_profile.png" width="80%" height="80%" />

### 2. Add monitoring programs

<img src="images/upload_new.png" width="60%" height="70%" style="float:right; padding:15px" />

Navigate to the <span style="color:gray;">**Profile**</span> page. A few
options are available to upload specific data and data types. To create
and upload a new monitoring program, select <span
style="color:gray;">**Upload new layers**</span>. Alternatively, select
<span style="color:gray;">**Upload Layer**</span> from the <span
style="color:gray;">**Data**</span> drop down menu.

Upload your shapefiles by dragging and dropping them to the upload area,
or upload them from your device by using the <span
style="color:gray;">**Choose Files**</span> option.

Select the correct charset option for your documents and click <span
style="color:gray;">**Upload files**</span>.

The permissions panel can be used to set permissions for other GeoNode
users to view, download and edit your uploaded data.

The default options for viewing and downloading data is set as <span
style="color:gray;">**Everyone**</span>, meaning any GeoNode user.

In order to protect your data, specific users or groups must be
specified to be able to change metadata, or edit and manage your data.
If no user/ group is specified, the default for these functions will
remain with the owner user only. The upload status will be visible at
the top of the Upload page along with a time stamp of when the layer was
created and the progress. Once the upload is complete, click on the
<span style="color:gray;">**Name**</span> of the layer, which will be
identical to the name of the files uploaded.

<img src="images/upload_comp.png" width="80%" height="70%" />

The provided metadata detail can be viewed by selecting <span style="color:gray;">**Metadata detail**</span>.

<img src="images/prog_overview.png" width="60%" height="70%" padding:10px" />

### 3. Editing metadata

By selecting <span style="color:gray;">**Editing Tools**</span> on the
right hand panel, the matadata, styles and the spacial data layer can be
edited, removed and managed.

<img src="images/edit_layer.png" width="60%" height="70%" style="float:left; padding:10px" />

To edit, or add to the spatial layer select <span style="color:gray;">**Edit data**</span> under <span style="color:gray;">**Layer**</span>.

<img src="images/editing.png" width="60%" height="70%" style="float:left; padding:10px" />

Select <span style="color:gray;">**Advanced Edit**</span> under <span
style="color:gray;">**Metadata**</span> to provide necessary information
about the uploaded program. Provide a <span
style="color:gray;">**Title**</span> and an <span
style="color:gray;">**Abstract**</span> with additional information
about the program.

By default the <span style="color:gray;">**Owner**</span> will be
indicated as the user that uploaded the data. <span
style="color:gray;">**Maintenance frequency**</span> refers to the
frequency at which the site is maintained, visited or observed.<span
style="color:gray;">**Temporal extent start**</span> and <span
style="color:gray;">**Temporal extent end**</span> indicate the dates at
which the program was implemented or started, and when it ended, if it
is not ongoing.

The EOV’s studied at the locations of the monitoring program can be
selected from a drop down menu under <span
style="color:gray;">**Eovs**</span>. Multiple selection of EOV’s is
possible.

Provide the levels of <span style="color:gray;">**Readiness
requirements**</span>, <span style="color:gray;">**Readiness
coordination**</span>, <span style="color:gray;">**Readiness
data**</span> according to the options provided in the drop down menu.
For more information regarding the classification and description of
levels, see <span style="color:gray;">**[A Framework for Ocean
Observing](DOI:10.5270/OceanObs09-FOO)**</span>.

The <span style="color:gray;">**Project website**</span> can be given as
URL in the space provided. The <span style="color:gray;">**Point of
contact**</span> for the program and data as an institutional email
address.

### 4. Add additional Attributes

Navigate to <span style="color:gray;">**Create a new layer**</span>
under <span style="color:gray;">**Profile**</span>. Provide a name and
title for the new or edited attributes, as well as the <span
style="color:gray;">**Geometry type**</span> used. Click <span
style="color:gray;">**Create**</span>. Alternatively, select <span
style="color:gray;">**Create Layer**</span> from the <span
style="color:gray;">**Data**</span> drop down menu.

<img src="images/create_layer.png" width="50%" height="50%" />

### 5. Upload additional documents and files

Navigate to <span style="color:gray;">**Upload new documents**</span>
under <span style="color:gray;">**Profile**</span>. Provide a <span
style="color:gray;">**Title**</span> for the document to be uploaded.
Alternatively, select <span style="color:gray;">**Upload
Document**</span> from the <span style="color:gray;">**Data**</span>
drop down menu.

<img src="images/upload_doc.png" width="90%" height="90%" />

Upload the file from your device and provide a URL for the where
possible. Select the monitoring program that the newly uploaded document
should be associated with by navigating to the program title under <span
style="color:gray;">**Link to**</span>. Click <span
style="color:gray;">**Upload**</span>.

### 6. Create a new map

Navigate to <span style="color:gray;">**Create a new map**</span> under
<span style="color:gray;">**Profile**</span>. Alternatively, select
<span style="color:gray;">**Create Map**</span> from the <span
style="color:gray;">**Maps**</span> drop down menu.The interactive map
(©OpenStreetMap contributors) is a useful tool for creating maps with
new spacial data or by using data from an existing monitoring program on
GeoNode GOOS BioEco. It further enables the user to perform basic
functions such as measuring physical distances and browsing locations or
coordinates.

<img src="images/create_map.png" width="100%" />

**A.** Add <span style="color:gray;">**Layers**</span> to a map. Select
the monitoring program from which a layer should be imported onto the
map. Alternatively, see **C**.

**B.** Use the <span style="color:gray;">**Search tool**</span> to
navigate to specific locations or search for a location using
coordinates. The latter option will provide fields to input latitudinal
and longitudinal values. Click the <span
style="color:gray;">**Settings**</span> icon under <span
style="color:gray;">**Search by coordinates**</span> to select either
decimal or aeronautical coordinate input.

**C.** The <span style="color:gray;">**Options**</span> drop down menu
is used to print or save a newly created map. Select <span
style="color:gray;">**Catalog**</span> to browse and choose a monitoring
program to load onto the new map. <span
style="color:gray;">**Measure**</span> distances, areas or bearings on
the map in various units by selecting the desired options. Click and
drag the computer mouse to continue drawing a line or polygon. The
resulting measurements or polygons can be exported to GeoJSON or added
as a layer by selecting the icon.

**D.** <span style="color:gray;">**Map options**</span> allow for easy
navigation and zooming on the map. <span style="color:gray;">**Query
objects on map**</span> by selecting the destination/ location icon and
clicking on the object of interest on the map.

**E.** The bottom toolbar presents the scale of the map, which can be
selected from the drop down menu or by zooming in or out on the map. The
actual coordinates of the location at which the mouse point is
positioned, is showed. In this toolbar, the preferred Coordinate
reference system (CRS) can also be selected.
